Good morning, everybody.
Welcome out to the QuickTime Session 601,
How to Make Your Applications
QuickTime-Savvy.
My name is Ian Riitchie.
I'm part of the
QuickTime engineering team.
I have the pleasure of engineering
some of the engineers on this team.
Now, today we're going to present some
ideas to use some techniques.
To help you leverage
the power of QuickTime,
and now you may wonder, well,
why QuickTime?
We were told that some people
that will be attending this
show will be new to the OS,
will be new to QuickTime,
and that we should give a roadmap,
sort of an intro session of...
[Transcript missing]
There's thousands of titles
out there and you wonder,
well, why was it so popular?
And he talked about extensibility.
Let me go a little bit more into
the extensibility side of it.
If you have a video card that's unique
to your company and you want it to
work with the rest of QuickTime,
will you write a VDIG?
And a
It'll be able to play your VDIG then,
we'll talk to the card,
capture the video,
give it to the sequence grabber,
that will then work with Final Cut,
that'll work with sample
apps that we've gotten,
Adobe Premiere.
And as you've seen,
QuickTime has a lot of video compression
and decompression technology in it.
We didn't write all these.
Other people out there would
specialize on their code,
write really great algorithms,
and then wrap it in a codec and ship
it as part of the QuickTime technology.
Either we would license
it or you'd be part of the
third-party component program.
And users out there would be
able to use your software.
What we've done is we've set it
up so that you can specialize
on what you're really good at,
and everybody else takes advantage of it.
Today what we'd like to show you is
How you can, if you do these few calls,
a little bit of code
in your applications,
you'll be able to take advantage
of a lot of work that we've done,
leveraging.
There's a martial arts technique
that follows along this.
What is it called?
Where you use your
opponent's energy against it?
Judo.
Yeah, so we could call it QuickTime Judo.
The situation is completely cross-office.
Our product is not
machine-hard updates with you.
Our competitors are jacks and ways
to devour our remaining workmanship.
We have no protein.
Our shareholders have a hand in this,
and I am in for it.
All engineers go.
and you just say the company.
It must have been a disaster
to have any new features.
We need multimedia integration.
Movie playback, capture, still image,
import, and export, and interactivity.
As the hot schools get on,
it's expected that
YouTube will strike for code.
And we should.
I hope to have you covered.
It is not possible.
As my panel,
I gain instant access to a vast number
of movies and still image formats.
I must learn the ways of QuickTime if
I can fulfill the master's task in time.
and beginning to see
more clearly already.
Off the tables,
inverse discrete cosine transforms.
I won't be able to do battle
with such audible moments.
How I've mastered foreign
video concepts in two weeks.
I must read with great
speed and probably sleep.
I'd like to bring on Brad Ford and
Jon Summers to give you
guys an intro to Movies 101.
Thank you.
Good morning,
and welcome out to Movies 101,
which is the polite,
politically correct title.
I like to refer to it
as QuickTime Boot Camp.
We've been given the arduous
task of explaining to you the
minimal calls you need to know,
the basics,
to get a QuickTime-savvy app running.
Now, who will this be pertinent to?
Like Ian alluded to, we have, hopefully,
a lot of new people to the platform
and a lot of new people to QuickTime,
QuickTime newbies.
For those of you who have not
programmed in QuickTime before,
all of this information
will be pertinent.
We probably also have
some veterans out there,
people who have been programming
QuickTime for five or ten years.
All of this information is pertinent.
Don't go to sleep,
because we are going to interlace
brand new QuickTime 6 API calls
that you should be aware of and
you'll be interested in knowing.
So let's start with a very high
level overview of what a movie is.
Suspend reality for a moment and forget
everything that you know about a movie.
Because in QuickTime's world,
a movie has nothing to do
with $8 seats or popcorn.
A QuickTime movie is more
like a card catalog drawer.
You've seen card catalogs before.
They're the things over in the
corner at the libraries that no one
uses because there's a computer next
to them that does the same thing.
But 10 or 15 years ago,
people used to use a card catalog.
And the idea behind it is you have
thousands of books and you don't
know where to find anything unless
you have an organizing abstraction
that tells you where to find things.
That's what a QuickTime movie is.
It's no more than a catalog.
So think of a drawer.
It's got index cards in it.
Each one of these index
cards points to a book.
So you can think of the books
as being the actual data that
you would want to look up.
And the index cards are
tracks in a QuickTime movie.
QuickTime supports a bunch
of different types of tracks:
video, audio, MIDI, sprites.
And all of these tracks you can think
of as being a separate index card
that points to books that will show
you where to get the actual data.
So a QuickTime movie is actually
a catalogue of media resources.
It contains a list of tracks
which tell us what the media is,
where the media can be located,
and when to play the media.
You'll notice that a QuickTime movie
is not a QuickTime movie file.
The media data references,
the media data samples
do not necessarily...
need to live in the same media storage
unit as the actual QuickTime movie.
Okay, let's give a quick demo on Demo
Machine 1 that illustrates this point.
Okay, so I hope you like this analogy
of the card catalog and the index
cards because you're going to
hear it over and over and over,
so get used to it if you hate it.
I've brought up one of the
old QuickTime stupid movies.
This is a tradition every
year to have a stupid movie,
and it's a lot cheaper than
trying to get a Spider-Man trailer
or something like that,
so here we go.
This is an actual QuickTime movie
that actually plays.
♪
Well, I'm done programming it for today.
I think I'll relax
with some QuickTime TV.
I've got kickboxing.
I've got some.
Okay, let's look at a little bit of
information about this movie.
First thing we'll notice is that, okay,
64.4 megabytes on disk.
That's really big for just a catalog,
so the light should go off in your head.
This isn't just the catalog.
This is the card catalog drawer and the
books all wrapped up into one big file.
This is also known as
a self-contained movie,
where you get the media data and
the catalog in the same file.
You don't have to do it this way,
but this is the most
portable way of doing it.
So if you're going to download
something from the Internet,
this is the way you'll usually find them.
The catalog and the books
all in one big file.
But we can play around with this.
So, for instance, in QuickTime Player,
I'm able to perform
some editing functions.
I'm just going to go ahead
and grab the whole movie,
select all, I'm going to copy it,
And then I'm gonna make a
new movie and paste it in.
And so this is now untitled one,
and I'm going to say save.
Notice I get two things I can do with it.
I can either save normally,
allowing dependencies.
What that means is it just
gives you the catalog.
Copies down the information from the
card catalog index card and writes
that little bit out to a new file.
If you make the movie self-contained,
notice it's going to
be 64 megabytes again,
because it's going to
write all the data out.
If I had made an edit list,
if I had taken little chunks,
think of them as little
sections of the books,
you know, page 100 to 114,
it would do the same thing.
It would just take the little chunks
that it needed from the sample media,
write it out to a new file.
Let's save it normally,
allowing dependencies.
So I gave it the beautiful
title of Untitled One.
Way to go, Brad.
And let's play a little bit of it.
and the rest of the team.
Amazingly, it plays.
But let's investigate a little bit.
48K.
So now it's just the catalog.
Just the information that you
need and it's pointing to the
books that are in file one.
Okay, just to show you that there
are no tricks up my sleeve,
I am going to close that.
I'm going to delete the Seating for
Dummies movie and I'm going to try to
open Untitled and is going to yell at me.
Well, first it's going to
search for a long time,
and then it's going to yell at me.
But you get the idea.
The books are no longer there.
We now have a card catalog
that points nowhere.
So let's go back to the slides.
Okay, where does movie data come from?
Now let's talk a little bit
about the books themselves.
A QuickTime library is a lot more
flexible than a library that you would
go to in real life because the books
don't have to be stored in the library.
The data that you would want to bring
into your movie or call from your movie
can be located any number of places.
We'll talk about four of them.
Local storage.
It can be stored in a disk file,
not necessarily a .mov file.
QuickTime can import a lot of
other file formats in place.
What that means is it doesn't need to
turn them into a QuickTime movie first.
For instance, an MPEG file, MPEG-2,
MPEG-4.
These files can all be opened
in place without writing some
QuickTime specific data to them.
So you can get it from a disk file.
You can get it from a remote source URL,
such as an HTTP server or
an RTSP streaming server.
You can also get a
movie that's in memory.
If it's already been loaded,
you have a handle to it,
you have a pointer to it,
you can reference that media
in your catalog as well.
And here's the real selling point for me.
Different pieces can come
from different places.
So you can have one part of it
coming from an RTSP streaming server.
You can have a flash track coming
from an HTTP streaming server.
You can have a voiceover coming
from a local file on disk,
all in the same movie,
because these are all
just separate files.
So you can have a movie
that's already been loaded,
you have a handle to it,
you have a pointer to it,
you have a reference to that
media in your catalog as well.
And here's the real selling point for me.
You can get it from a disk file
or an RTSP streaming server.
You can get it from a disk file as well.
And here's the real selling point for me.
You can have a movie
that's already been loaded,
you have a flash track coming
from an RTSP streaming server.
You can have a flash track coming
And here's the real selling point for me.
You can have a movie
that's already been loaded,
you have a flash
So we'll take a high-level
view of what we'll need to do
to become QuickTime 6 savvy.
Working with movies,
the first thing we need
to do is initialize the
QuickTime toolbox with Enter Movies.
We're going to show you how you
can open movies from any location.
Once you've opened the movie,
then you need to give QuickTime,
which is a toolbox for
dealing with time-based media,
you need to give it processing time.
So we'll talk about that.
Then, for movie playback and editing,
we'll show you the importance
of attaching a movie
controller to the movie.
When you've done your edits,
then we'll show you how you
need to save your movie.
Note that applications should
not call exit to movies when
they're closing the application.
Exit to movies really should be called
if you are writing a component and
that component has called Enter Movies,
you should balance that
call with an exit to movies.
So take out that exit to movies.
in your applications.
Now, just to show you that QuickTime,
a QuickTime movie is actually
a catalogue of media and does
not play the media in the...
In the order that the media is
actually in the media storage,
we'll go back a few slides and
we'll talk about where does
QuickTime media come from?
There are a couple of locations here,
local storage, remote, and from memory.
But that's not all the places that
QuickTime movies can come from.
And in order to specify that location,
we have a data reference.
This is an abstract location specifier.
QuickTime developers are used
to the file manager-based calls,
such as Open Movie File.
Now with the abstracted family
of calls using a data reference,
you can now specify movie
locations from anywhere.
A data reference is a
handle to a data structure.
The DataRefType specifies the accessor
component that is required to read the
Data source.
Therefore,
a data reference specifies location,
and a data ref type
specifies the accessor,
and that...
That returns an instance of a data
handler component which knows where the
data is stored and how to read the data.
For example, local file storage,
a data reference is...
is a handle to a structure
of an alias record.
This alias handle plus
the data ref type alias
Allows us to use an alias data handler
to return the data from the file.
Now that we have specified
the location of the movie,
how do we open the movie?
We open the movie with
new movie from data ref.
This is a general form of the file
manager based new movie from file.
Notice that we,
new movie from data ref takes
a data ref and a data ref type
and returns a movie catalog.
Note that we do not need
to call open movie file,
close movie file.
New movie from data ref
opens the movie storage,
loads the movie catalog,
then closes the movie storage for us.
Now we'll have a demo on Demo 1 to
actually show how you can actually
write your own data handler.
This is a demonstration of how
to get QuickTime movies which
are stored inside a database.
Right.
This is an interesting plug on the things
you can do with... Can we have Demo 1,
please?
Okay,
this is sort of an interesting plug on
what you can do with QuickTime when we
haven't even foreseen this possibility.
You should not be afraid
of data references.
Data references are your friends.
You can continue to think of them
as aliases to files if all you're
working on are file-based things.
But they buy you a lot of things
that you wouldn't get otherwise.
So you should use data references
and use these newer APIs.
One such instance is this very
cool thing called FrontBase.
FrontBase is a relational database server
put out by a company called FrontBase,
and it's very QuickTime savvy.
They've done some very cool
things with QuickTime movies.
Most databases,
if they are storing a lot of files,
you'll have references
to them in a database.
You know, where the file is,
the name of it,
the duration of the movie.
But what FrontBase is doing is storing
the whole movie in the database.
So once you put it in the database,
you can't pull it out anymore.
It's not a .mov file.
It's in the database
as this one big blob.
So let's go ahead and
start up the server.
And we'll click on this and show you...
and more.
So, I've made a table in here
called Streamable Movie,
and it has two fields in this table.
There's a file name field
and a movie content field.
One of them is the name
that I gave to the movie,
and one of them is the actual movie,
which I uploaded into the database.
Now, once it's there,
there's no way to pull it out because
it's not a file on disk anymore,
an MOV file.
It's not an HTTP streaming server.
It's nothing of the sort.
It's from a database.
So what did the front base people do?
They wrote their own data
handler that grabs movies from
their database as requested.
Let's try that.
Here's a little Cocoa application
that just demos how they do this.
There's no other way to get these movies
out of the database except by using
the data ref and the data handler.
Wow, that guy can play.
So, Jon,
what's happening under the hood here?
So what's happening is...
We've used New Movie from DataRef
with a data reference which tells
location in the database of this movie.
That is the file name,
the name of the movie.
Also we have used a DataRef type
which specifies the front-base
custom data handler.
These two,
this combination gives us a data
handler of the custom data handler,
of FrontBase's custom data handler.
Once we have the movie catalog
from new movie from DataRef,
we have a slight problem.
The data references inside the movie
catalog refer back to the original movie
file that was imported into the database.
So before we can work with the movie,
we have to go through all the
media handlers and reset the data
reference to use the front-based
custom data action handler.
Now,
as QuickTime requests data to display,
the data handler goes to the
database and actually makes byte
range calls into that data blob.
So, as you can see... So, for instance,
you can... It's not just downloading
the whole thing as a blob.
We have random access to it.
The data handler goes out and it finds
the new frames that are requested when
I scrub around or go to a new position.
It's not quite as fast as Instant On,
but still pretty good.
All right, so let's go back to slides.
Okay.
Now the ever-important
topic of movie controllers.
Movie controllers are a
hugely functional object.
What we're going for here
is maximum efficiency.
When you want to build a QuickTime-savvy
application and you want to get a lot of
work done with a minimal amount of code,
use movie controllers.
This is not market speak.
This is not me trying to push something
on you because I like movie controllers.
If you want to get a lot of work done,
attach a movie controller to your movie.
You'll get the most bang
for the buck doing so.
So movie controllers.
Once you've opened your movie,
for instance using
New Movie from DataRef,
you attach a new movie controller
to it using New Movie Controller,
and then you can run your event loop.
There's a special call
called MCIsPlayerEvent.
If you're used to the old wait
next event based application loop,
then you're used to having some big
switch statement where you handle events.
Well, all you have to do is plug
in MCIsPlayerEvent before you
handle the event yourself.
What MCIsPlayerEvent does is it
will send you a message that says
it gives QuickTime a chance to look
at the event before you process it,
and QuickTime will say to you, "Yeah,
I know that guy.
That's my event." Or it'll say,
"I have no idea what this is.
You handle it yourself."
And so it gives you a lot of
automatic processing of events.
When you're finished,
here's another little important thing.
Dispose of your movie controller first.
If you've attached it to your movie,
don't dispose of the movie first.
That will be bad.
Okay,
a lot of developers have expressed to me,
you know, that they're afraid to use a
movie controller because they
don't want that stock look.
They don't want their application to
look like everybody else's application.
Well, a movie controller is not the same
thing as a movie controller bar.
I think the movie controller bar
is fantastic because it puts a lot
of functionality into 16 pixels.
But if you don't want to use it,
you don't have to.
You can still use a movie
controller without showing the bar.
You can make it invisible
and still use all of the
functionality in this great object,
this delegate object.
Okay,
now I'm going to give you four compelling
reasons to use movie controllers.
First one,
at the risk of sounding redundant,
they simplify control.
They are, after all, controllers.
There is a wonderful
call called MCDoAction.
In a library as large as QuickTime,
where you have, you know,
well over 2,000 function calls,
it's nice to know that there is one
call that you can use that does,
I believe, 77 different things.
So with MCDoAction,
you give it your movie controller,
then you put in an action,
be it action pre-roll and play,
action go to time, set keys enabled,
whatever.
And then the third parameter becomes
your context-specific information,
your parameter that
you need for that one.
For instance,
if you want to play your movie
using a movie controller,
you use MCAction pre-roll and play and
then give it at a fixed rate to play at.
Okay, here's probably the most compelling
reason to use movie controllers.
Some things will not work without them.
If you want to do interactivity,
it's not an option.
You have to use movie controllers
because there's no other way to do it.
You have to use the movie controllers
to get those events to do intermovie
communication and work with sprites.
With QuickTime VR,
you sort of implicitly need a controller
because you don't play a VR movie,
you sort of play with a VR movie.
So without a controller,
it wouldn't really make sense.
Streaming you can do
without a movie controller,
but it's really hard,
and you have to do a lot of code
by yourself that's taken care of
automatically with a movie controller.
So I would advise you to use
a movie controller if you're
going to use streaming.
The second thing you can do with them,
so you can control,
you can also query your movie.
You can get movie information
using your movie controller object,
like MCGetCurrentTime.
There's also one called
MCGetControllerInfo.
This is mostly used for adjusting menus.
So let's say you have an edit menu that
you need to adjust on the fly based on
whether or not your movie is playing.
You can use MCGetControllerInfo,
pass in any flags, whatever the,
you know, you have a long that's flags,
and it gives back to you these
flags and you can compare
them with whatever you want.
For instance, MCInfo is playing,
or is looping, or has sound.
These will tell you what you want to know
about your movie and you can adjust your
menus based on what it gives you back.
The third reason that you would want to
use controllers is that there's a very
simple mechanism for providing callbacks.
This is customization.
So if you don't like the custom
way QuickTime does something,
you can change it by intercepting
an event before it gets handled
by QuickTime and change it around.
One simple example
that I can think of is,
for instance, in QuickTime,
in a QuickTime movie,
if you click on the portion of
the movie where it's being shown,
it stops.
A lot of people don't like that.
They want it to just keep
playing no matter if people
click on the movie or not.
Well, if you set up an action filter,
like, for instance,
my action filter callback,
then it will intercept these events
before they get to QuickTime.
And you could intercept, say,
MC action movie click,
and you could make it into a null
event and it would then discard it.
And it would say, "Yes,
I handled the event.
Keep on doing whatever you were doing."
The last one is tasking
with movie controllers.
If you've worked with
QuickTime a little bit,
you know that it needs time to
process the movie information
that it's working on.
You can use a lower level
call such as TaskMovie,
but you don't have to use those
if you're using a movie controller
because you can use MCIsPlayerEvent.
If you use that call,
it will task movie for you.
It will make that call and it will give
your movie sufficient processing time.
There's also a new API in QuickTime 6
that gives more efficient processing
time to QuickTime and it lets you
know how often to call QuickTime,
but I'm not going to steal
the thunder of people who are
going to talk about that later,
so more on that later.
One of the other great things that
attaching a movie controller to a movie
gives you is you immediately get a
nice professional support that you can
actually now support movie editing.
As you can see, if you turn movie editing
on with MC-enabled editing,
then there's a mapping from
high-level edit commands,
menu edit commands, to MC functions.
Not only do you get cut, copy, paste,
but you also get undo.
Adding media samples is a simple matter
of calling beginMediaEdits in order to
prepare the movie storage for write.
QuickTime opens the
movie storage for write.
You add media samples,
you add compressed media samples along
with descriptions of what the media
is and the duration of the media.
Then, when you've finished your editing,
you close the media for write.
Then it's important to call
insertMedia into track.
This is very much like updating
your card catalog index to
actually point to the books.
And this then associates
the media with the track.
New movie from scratch.
We can create a new movie with create
movie storage using our old friend,
the data reference and data ref type.
This returns an empty movie catalog.
Then we can add tracks and media.
Then we add the movie
catalog into the storage.
Then, when we're finished,
we use close movie storage to close.
You'll notice these calls
are new in QuickTime 6.
This is because
QuickTime has always had a file
manager-based way of finding movies,
movie location.
Now, with data references,
We now have the movie storage API,
which is a more generic way of
accessing movie data locations.
Then, when you've finished editing,
you want to save your movie.
You can update the catalog,
which is just to synchronize
the in-memory model of the
movie back to the movie storage.
We can also flatten a movie with
Flatten Movie Data to Data Ref,
which actually then trims the media
data so that only the data that
is referenced by the catalog is
in a self-contained media storage.
Then we can also export...
We can export a QuickTime movie
to a native media format,
such as you might have an AFF file,
AIFF file,
which you can then bring into QuickTime.
QuickTime can import that.
It will create a temporary catalog.
You can edit that movie.
Then you can save that back out
as the native media file format.
There you have it.
Congratulations, Movies 101 graduates.
You now know all the basics that
you need to know to get a basic
QuickTime-Savvy application.
Thanks.
and the success is finally mine.
Behold,
I can open and play a DB movie file.
Yes, Jon-Sa, but can you open dozens of
video and audio formats with
a single set of API calls?
No, you cannot.
I, on the other hand,
have discovered the way
of the data handler.
Aye, data handlers.
Excellent.
Let's bring up Tom Dowdy to tell us
a little bit about video processing.
Thanks Ian.
Jon and Brad talked about
where do you-- creating a movie
from scratch or modifying a
movie by adding samples to it.
One of the common questions
we get is where else could
you get these samples from?
QuickTime has built-in
support for capture,
compression, import,
and export that abstract away from
your application the details of
particular types of video input,
output, compression formats, etc.
Capture is a very important
part of QuickTime,
and the structure that you need to
understand in order to perform capture
is called the sequence grabber.
The sequence grabber provides an
abstraction from your application
that allows you to capture
any number of media types,
audio and video being the most common,
but it does support an unlimited
number of types that can
be captured simultaneously.
The quintessential source code for
showing how to use the Sequence Criber,
it's really a little bit too
much to go into detail here,
is called HackTV,
it's available on Apple's website.
Video compression is another
important area of QuickTime.
Your application can perform
video processing on the video
before it's been compressed,
but after it has been captured.
You can process a live
video and store it.
You can take an existing movie,
process it,
and store it back into a new movie.
Or you can perform video processing
while movies are being played back.
If you're interested in
doing processing on videos,
such as perhaps alpha overlays,
displaying a video bug, doing effects or
crossfades between videos,
session 602, which follows this session,
gives more information about this.
Another important aspect of QuickTime is
the ability to open multiple file
types or save out different file types.
The movie import and export
components within QuickTime
Allow your application to perform
this importing and exporting
without knowing the specific details
of each particular file type.
This means that when new file
types are added by QuickTime,
your application gains
immediate support for them.
For example, when we added MPEG-4,
even though it's a very
different file type,
applications that are using the
normal QuickTime calls for opening
files and exporting files immediately
gain the ability to import and export
those files into the MPEG-4 format.
In addition, there's facilities within
QuickTime for outputting a movie
directly to an analog video source.
This is sometimes called print-to-video.
Also,
all of these import and export functions
have built-in user interfaces within
QuickTime your application can call on,
so you don't have to have specific
dialogues that you construct for
configuring the user's options.
But, if you're an application that's
perhaps command-line oriented
or does batch processing,
the same settings are also
available for you to set via an API.
Again, if you're interested in import,
export, and print-to-video, session 602,
which follows this session,
has a lot more detail.
Ian?
Hi.
Make sure you go to that
session this afternoon.
It's going to be really great.
Now let's bring up Sam Bushell,
or just before that.
Let's see what our friends are up to.
Video capture and processing.
Thank you, QuickTime team,
for again illuminating my understanding.
Integrative effects and video acquisition
is as easy as snapping my fingers.
The concept is comparably simple.
I write fewer lines of code.
QuickTime performs the dirty work
while I receive all the credit.
Ha ha, QuickTime has filled me
with much self-confidence.
Perhaps QuickTime will also bring me
much more success with the ladies.
Okay.
Sam Bushell.
Good morning.
Yes, my name is Sam Bushell.
I'm here to tell you a little
bit about a basic introduction
to QuickTime still image support.
QuickTime still image support
consists of two classes of component,
graphics importers, which are used for
drawing still image files,
and graphics exporters,
which are used for
creating still image files.
Both of these component types are
designed with the philosophy of
making them easy to start using and
then to have extra calls that you
can make as an opt-in to get to more
powerful features and functionality.
What I'm going to go through here
is a brief introduction to how
to call or how to start calling
both of these kinds of components.
And then I'll briefly touch
on some of the more advanced
features that are available.
And then I'll show you a brief demo
of some sample code that I personally
recommend to have a look at.
So, to draw still image files,
first you need to get a
graphics importer component.
There are a bunch of APIs.
There's one that's FS-based,
but in order to gain FSRef support,
you should consider using data references
that you've made from an alias handle,
as we discussed,
and passing in the alias type.
When you pass, once you've called this,
Image Compression Manager will search for
a graphics importer that's appropriate
for the file that you've pointed it at.
It'll search based on the file type,
if there is one, the file name suffix,
if there is one, the MIME type,
if one is known by the data reference,
or can be inferred from other
information that the data
handler knows how to deal with.
And it'll even look at some of the
data inside the file if necessary.
If it fails,
it will return an error and the
graphics input will be zero.
At this point,
you can find out more information
about the data reference.
You can find out about the image file.
You can ask for information
about the dimensions,
the color space, metadata, and so forth.
But in this simple example,
I'm going to pretend that we already
know where we want to draw the image.
And so we'll set the location
for it to draw with the graphics
import setDeskDirectCall.
After that, we're ready.
We can just draw it on the screen,
and next time we...
Next time it's appropriate for
that to appear on the screen,
it'll appear.
You can draw again and again if you need.
You could change the location.
You can ask for more information.
You can hang on to the graphics
importer component while you need it,
but when you're done with it,
you should close the component
and release the storage
that it's held around.
With this simple piece of code,
it doesn't actually know about
a particular file format.
The data reference type is
not the type of the file,
as some people initially think.
It's the type of the data reference.
So for an alias handle,
data ref type is alias.
So this piece of code can work
for a whole bunch of different
image file formats based on the
available graphics importers.
These are the formats that you'd
be able to use in QuickTime 5.
As you would have seen this morning,
we've added a JPEG 2000 to
this list for QuickTime 6.
Other things that
graphics importers can do.
What we showed there was how to...
Specify a rectangle for
drawing the image in upright.
But you can also choose to pass
a transformation matrix that can
give you more accurate positioning.
You can even rotate or put
the image in perspective.
I should point out that in QuickTime 6,
we've done a bunch of good work to
improve the quality that you can
achieve with rotation and perspective,
which you can read more
about in our documentation.
But that's really neat.
Graphics importers support
a variety of transfer modes,
such as quick-draw transfer
modes and also some other ones,
such as alpha composition.
They support arbitrary
clipping to a region.
They'll let you read metadata out.
An important kind of metadata
that's coming up on the scene
is exif metadata in exif files.
Who here has a digital camera that
they purchased in the last five years?
That's a large number of people.
If your camera makes JPEG files,
those JPEG files are almost
certainly actually exif files.
Exif doesn't define how to do
compression so much as it defines
how to lay out metadata in the file.
And there are particular kinds
of camera-oriented metadata,
such as flash, exposure time,
those kinds of things are stored
in the metadata for exif files.
Graphics importers can also support
multiple images in some files.
The relationship between
those different images varies.
For a Photoshop file,
there's different layers.
For a TIFF file, there might be pages.
For a PDF, there might be pages.
Exif files have the main
image and then a thumbnail.
Graphics importers are also
extensible by third parties.
There's a company
called Escape in Greece,
for example,
which sell a graphics importer
component for DICOM images,
which are used in medical imaging.
For creating still image files,
the API is still very similar.
You have to choose
which graphics importer,
graphics exporter you
want based on the chalk.
You have to choose what choice
of file type you want to create.
You open the component directly.
Then you tell it where
the image comes from.
It might come from a G world
or from a picture or from
another graphics importer.
You tell it where the
output should go to,
which might be a handle, a file,
or a data reference.
You tell it to perform the export,
and it might actually tell you if you'd
like to know how much data was created,
and then when you're done,
you close the component.
With that amount of code,
you can write a bunch of
different file formats.
This list keeps growing as
third parties extend it,
and we're extending it with
JPEG 2000 and so forth.
Other things that
graphics exporters can do,
they can provide a user dialog
for the user interface to
access format-specific features.
They can store metadata in the file.
They can write thumbnails.
And they're also extensible
by third parties.
So I'd like to show you a quick
demo of some sample code that's
up on the QuickTime website,
on the Apple site.
This is called Improve Your Image.
It's over on Demo 1,
which I should wake up.
So I didn't have to write
anything fancy here.
I did change some of the images so
that it's some more interesting things,
because I like to show pictures
that I take on holiday in Australia.
So let's come back.
and many more.
So let's have a look at a couple
of lines of code to draw a picture.
Can you see the kangaroo?
Well, scaling the image is very easy
just by changing the rectangle,
but with a very small
amount of further code,
you could just rotate it or
put the image into a non-app-on
transformation such as perspective.
This kind of transformation
is particularly improved.
It used to be point sampling
in QuickTime 5 and before.
Now it might be bilinear interpolation
or bicubic interpolation,
perhaps with anti-aliasing.
Looks really good.
QuickTime can also perform
alpha composition for you.
Here's a picture of a beach and a
picture of an old mascot of ours.
With a normal transfer mode,
you see a white box around the image.
With the transparent transfer mode,
we do a key color,
but that gives you halos and maybe
takes out pieces of your image.
But this image actually
has an alpha channel.
The important point here is
that alpha composition is a very
important component of the image.
Alpha composition is an orthogonal
feature from the transformation matrix.
So we can actually rotate the
image and still have it composed
on the image on the background.
Briefly, because I'm running out of time,
let me show you some...
Support for layered images in Photoshop.
Here's a slightly doctored image
of a wallaby using an iMac.
I'm going to go through the
different layers in the file.
Individually, there's a background,
there's the shadow underneath the iMac,
there's the iMac itself,
and then there's the
wallaby brought back in.
And now I'm going to use QuickTime to
draw them without erasing in between.
And this time we see the background,
the shadow, the iMac.
And this is more or less the same
image as we saw in the first place,
but composed by making QuickTime calls
to the graphics importers.
So that's all I have time to demonstrate,
but I recommend having a look at
this sample code if you want to find
interesting things that you can do
very easily with graphics importers.
Thank you very much.
I might have to step back.
We can bring up the slide machine,
please.
Thank you very much, Sam.
Yeah, and that sample code, go out.
We'll have a link at the,
or a slide at the end of this that'll
tell you where to go and get lots of the
sample code that we've covered today.
But hopefully you're
getting the impression that,
hey, I do a little bit of work
and I get a big payoff.
That's where we're trying to go.
Let's see how our friends are doing.
With sufficient cunning and
lightning-swift reading,
I may succeed in devising
an image-savvy framework.
But I must make haste.
[Transcript missing]
Understanding, JPEG, TIFF, GIF,
Photoshop.
QuickTime handles them
all for me automatically.
Import and export are
mine for the taking.
Thank you, oh wise red-headed sage.
Now I'd like to bring Tim Monroe up
here to discuss interactivity with us.
Thank you, Tim Monroe.
Thank you.
In addition to the linear media formats
that we've seen and still image formats,
QuickTime also supports what
we call interactive movies.
What's special about these is they
don't just play frames over time.
Instead,
they respond to the user events such
as mouse input or keyboard events.
With a well-made interactive movie,
these events can trigger various
actions that give you dynamic feedback.
And QuickTime supports two
basic interactive types,
namely QuickTime VR tracks
and flash tracks.
In addition to those
intrinsically interactive types,
there are two other media types that
we can add dynamic behaviors to,
what I call scriptable.
These are text tracks and sprite tracks.
And as we've seen,
QuickTime is an extensible architecture,
so if you're really into
this interactive stuff,
you can add your own.
So, if you're really into
this interactive stuff,
you can add your own.
So, if you're really into
this interactive stuff,
you can add your own media types.
Some examples here would be 3D media,
for instance.
Let's take an easy demo of
some interactive movies.
Can we have the demo machine up?
Where did they go?
Here's a simple example of
a QuickTime VR panorama.
As you can see, I'm sort of standing
out there in the desert.
And by clicking and dragging the mouse,
I can move around within the panorama.
So I, as the user,
have control over what I'm
seeing at any particular time.
I can also use the keyboard
to zoom in and zoom out.
And as you can see,
when I move my cursor over
this area of the movie,
it turns into an arrow.
If I click that, I go to a new node.
So here we have a multi-node panorama.
Another type of QuickTime VR movie
is what we call an object movie.
This is sort of where I'm
controlling the object.
I can move it around.
Again, I can zoom in, zoom out.
So I'm in control here.
Another media type, as I mentioned,
was Flash.
Here's an off-the-shelf Flash movie.
Again,
the passage of time is irrelevant here.
I'm in control as I move the
cursor over various objects here.
I can then drag them around and
create a nice little eggplant.
We can get Flash movies that
have more dynamism in them.
Here's one where I've got
sort of this pulsating square.
I can use controls
here to move it around.
I can make it larger.
I can move it to a random location.
And so forth.
and one note, two more examples.
This is a sprite track,
so I've got a graphic image.
As you can see,
the one penguin is changing
its location over time.
When it gets to the bottom,
it jumps back up.
If I click on that penguin,
he'll blink his eyes,
and the other penguin will start moving.
And also, you can see that sort of hidden
down here are some controls.
I can move the penguin back to his start,
move him to the end, and so forth.
Again, I'm in control.
What I do to the movie
is what makes it go.
Here's another example,
and this one I really like.
This is just a graphic image
using one of the effects to
give a ripple effect to it.
And again, if I click there,
I get a nice little ripple as if I had
thrown a stone in at the penguin.
OK, back to slides, please.
What's distinctive about
interactive movies?
As Brad mentioned earlier,
when I'm working with
an interactive movie,
I have to have a movie controller.
Also, objects within the movie,
such as the, uh,
The Penguin That I Clicked On can send
actions to other objects in the movie,
or indeed, I can send actions to other
movies that I have open.
That's a very powerful capability
that we call intermovie communication.
And can I have the demo machine back?
Let's take a quick look at one of those.
Here I'm going to open two movies.
We have our ripple penguin again.
You can see he's still
responding to my clicks.
Over here I have a
similar looking penguin.
He doesn't have any rippling,
but when I click him,
the other penguin has disappeared.
So a message is being sent from the
one movie to the other movie saying,
please toggle your visibility state,
and I can make him disappear as I like.
Back to slides, please.
Okay, another nice feature which
is not really interactive,
but which seems to go
along with interactivity,
are skinned movies.
A skinned movie is a movie window
with a custom window shape.
So that's really what's
involved with a skinned movie.
When we do that,
we don't get our standard window frame.
We don't get a title bar.
We don't get any of
those nice Aqua buttons.
We don't get anything
to drag it around by.
So we've got to define those behaviors.
The nice thing about a skin
movie is it allows you,
the content creator,
to specify the entire look
and feel of that movie.
You're not stuck in this
rectangular box anymore.
You can do more interesting things.
Now, because you're not
getting a controller bar,
you may need to supply some
controls for the user to be
able to manipulate the movie.
And I think we're ready for a demo,
so let's take a demo
of a few simple skins.
Here's a couple done by Totally Hip.
Here we have a movie window
that is submarine-shaped,
and inside of here is a video.
This is actually a flash track
that is providing the rest
of the graphic elements here.
You'll notice the little propeller
down here is turning around,
and this movie has a cool
feature that if I click here,
the escape button,
it will close the window.
Let's take one more example.
Here's a fairly complicated Flash skin.
It's got some things up here.
I can select various.
Let's try some still images.
Got some nice 3D models here.
There's the hip bot.
This movie is kind of cool because it
can go out and query the environment.
You can see it knows that
I'm running on a Macintosh.
It knows that my haircut is punk,
whatever that is.
And it knows that I'm
running on QuickTime 6 here.
OK, back to slides.
[Transcript missing]
You amaze me with your
technical wizardry.
Master,
is the level of carnage satisfactory?
Yes, it is most gratifying.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, you'll notice that I haven't
shown you any code to figure out,
so you can incorporate
interactivity into your application.
The reason for that is that if you've
written your application right,
these kinds of interactive
movies will play automatically.
There's really nothing
special you need to do.
Now, there is some stuff that you can
do extra to make your application
a little more interactive savvy,
and I'll talk about that
later in session 604 today.
Now, I want to shift gears a little
bit and talk about writing
cross-platform QuickTime applications.
So, you've got some code that opens,
plays QuickTime movies.
What do you need to do to make sure
that it's portable to other systems?
In particular,
what I'm thinking is perhaps you have
an application that runs on Macintosh,
and you'd like to be able to port
it to Windows so that it runs there
and greatly increases your sales.
QuickTime in Windows is
a very good story.
Since QuickTime 3,
we've had identical programming
APIs on the two platforms.
The idea being that you can
code once and deliver this on
both Macintosh and Windows.
In order to do this,
we've had to make what we
call Macintosh data types,
such as handles, pointers,
off-screen G-worlds,
available on Windows as
well as on Macintosh.
So, for instance,
the few lines of code that I've got here,
I could put into my application.
I'm allocating a buffer,
and then later I'm
getting rid of the buffer.
That code works as well on
Windows as it does on Macintosh.
This magic is provided by this thing
called the QuickTime Media Layer.
And essentially what they did was
take a whole lot of the Macintosh
operating system and shove it into
a library that works on Windows.
And I've listed here a few of the
various managers that you can call on
Windows because you might need those
to do your QuickTime programming.
Very important point.
A lot of people like to say that
QTML is not a porting layer.
Well, that's a little bit of a lie.
QuickTime, QTML is not a general
purpose porting layer.
So you can't think, oh,
I've got an application
that runs on Macintosh,
I'll just use this QTML to
get it to work under Windows.
In general, that won't work.
What QTML is,
is a special purpose porting layer.
It's designed to allow you to
take your QuickTime code and move
it to Windows easily and quickly.
So you can write the code once,
deliver it on multiple platforms.
Now I want to talk about a few
porting issues that you'll run into,
because of course nothing is
ever as easy as we say it is.
and there are four in particular.
Let's talk about namespace conflicts.
Turns out that Macintosh
had some various functions,
for instance, show window that you
use to show a window.
When the people in
Redmond did their APIs,
they thought, what do we call it when
we want to show a window?
How about show window?
Well, so we've got show
window on two platforms.
When you try and compile your Mac code
that calls show window for Windows,
you'll get a compiler error.
What do you do?
Just stick Mac on the front of it and
everything will work out perfectly.
So a certain number of Mac APIs,
this list is not exhaustive,
have been renamed to make them available
on Windows as well as on Macintosh.
Indian issues.
Macintosh was originally
a Big Indian platform.
This shows up in that data
in a QuickTime movie file is
stored in Big Indian format.
Big Indian means that the most
significant byte of multi-byte
data is stored lowest in memory.
Windows runs on little Indian platforms.
That is to say,
where the most significant byte
is stored highest in memory.
Now in general,
you don't need to worry about the
endianness of any multibyte data.
If I have some parameters that
I pass to a QuickTime function,
or if I call a QuickTime function
to get some data back,
it's going to be in native endian format.
That is to say,
in the format that is appropriate
for the host processor.
Occasionally, however,
you do need to worry about
the format of multibyte data.
Typically,
this happens when QuickTime gives
you a chunk of data that it
doesn't know the structure of.
One good example here
is with movie user data.
Here I have some lines of code
that show how you get what's called
movie user data from a movie file.
And in this particular case,
I'm asking it for the piece
of user data of type WLOC.
This is added to a movie to let you know
where to put the window on the screen.
Now, QuickTime does not know
the structure of that data.
So when you get it back,
you need to swap the bytes
of that to make sure that it
is in native Indian format.
And you can see that I'm
using a macro Indian S16,
B to N.
That is to say, big to native.
Now, byte swapping is only an
issue for multibyte data,
but not for C or Pascal strings,
even though they're multibyte.
They're treated as arrays
of single byte characters.
It's necessary only when you're
transferring data between
RAM and some external container,
such as a file.
And the best advice here is
simply use the macros that
you find in the header file,
Indian.h.
The QuickTime Media Layer supports
the Resource Manager,
so if you have data such as
user interface data or any type
of data stored in a resource,
you can use QTML on
Windows to read that data.
The gotcha here is that on Macintosh,
when you open an application,
the application's resource fork
is automatically opened for you.
On Windows, that's not true.
You need to go through some code like
this to make your resources available to
you when you're running under Windows.
Once again,
QuickTime tries hard to give you back
the information that you want in a
native Indian format so that you don't
need to worry about these issues.
If you have a custom resource, however,
where QuickTime doesn't
know the structure,
all it's going to do is give you back
the chunk of data that's in the resource.
You will then,
if you're running under Windows,
need to make sure that that data
is in a format that you can handle.
So there's a couple of ways
you can handle that issue.
A very simple way is to install
what's called a resource flipper,
and this is a callback procedure that
the resource manager will call when
you ask it to read that kind of data.
It will then call your function,
you do your flipping,
and it gives you back that.
Alternatively, you can just get back
the raw block of data,
and you know the structure of that
data because it's your custom resource,
so you can just flip whatever fields
you need at the time you need them.
One last thing is QuickTime puts
up a lot of dialogues as
part of its user interface.
This is really cool because
you get all this UI for free.
Under Windows,
you need to jump through a hoop
because you can't handle these
in the standard Macintosh way.
So what you'll need to do is either
install what's called a modeless
dialogue callback procedure,
or, alternatively,
if you have a fairly complex dialogue,
you should consider just re-implementing
it using the standard Windows APIs.
Amen.
Let me say just a few words about Carbon.
If you have some code
that was pre-Carbon,
you want to move it under Carbon.
The thing here to worry about, of course,
is that a lot of the data structures
are no longer transparent.
They're opaque,
so you need to use accessor
functions to get at them,
such as if I want to get
a menu ID pre-Carbon,
I could just dereference the menu
handle and look at the menu ID field.
Under Carbon, I can't do that.
They've given me an accessor function.
That accessor function is
not available under QTML,
so you can define your own
macro here to handle that.
And I'm done.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Tim Monroe.
The master will be so pleased with me.
I have implemented my code
in a cross-platform manner.
My code runs on Atari,
as well as vintage Commodore machines.
Tim Monroe has taught me
the way of Indian flipping.
With my newfound knowledge,
I can write my code once for
both Windows and Macintosh.
QuickTime Judo flows
strongly through my veins.
Let's bring up Greg Chapman.
He will discuss some issues
and enhancements that we made
around tasking QuickTime.
Greg.
You can hear me?
Yes.
There's always the question
that we always get asked,
how often should I call
QuickTime to give it time?
And I'm sure there are several
people in the room here who
have asked that question before,
and you never really get a
very satisfactory answer.
Inside Mac QuickTime says you
should task QuickTime regularly
and as often as possible.
Okay,
there's a lot of folklore about this.
The problem is that if
you task it too little,
you'll be okay on some movies,
but on more CPU-intensive movies,
you'll have a problem.
Some of the folklore is things like,
well, if the movie's not playing,
then I don't need to task it.
So I can see what the movie rate is.
If it's zero, I don't need to task it.
Wrong.
Big time wrong.
You saw a lot of movies
that Tim Monroe showed
you that were not playing,
but there was a lot of stuff going on.
You need to continue to task
QuickTime when the movie's playing.
A lot of people think you need to task it
once per every frame in the video track.
This is also incorrect.
That's a little bit overkill in general.
But QuickTime 6 helps you,
because there's got to be a better way.
New in QuickTime 6,
we have an API that you
can use to find out when
QuickTime needs to be tasked next.
So you call it each time.
If you're a WaitNext event-based app,
you call it every time before
you call WaitNext event.
You say, you know, how many ticks should
I pass to WaitNext event
so that I'll wake up again,
pass a null event to QuickTime.
If you're a
Carbon Event Loop timer-based app,
you can call it to schedule a timer
that you use to task QuickTime.
We have working sample code available.
There will be a URL at
the end of the session.
but again you shouldn't even have
to do this i mean this is this is
You shouldn't have to do this.
So on Mac OS X,
we have some higher level abstractions.
For Cocoa, we have NSMovieView.
Now, this got smarter with QuickTime 6.
NSMovieView has handled the tasking
of QuickTime for you in the past.
Now it knows about this new API,
it uses it,
and you'll only use the CPU that you
need to play this particular movie.
For Carbon,
we have a brand new thing in QuickTime 6
called the Carbon Movie Control.
This is really cool.
It's a first-class Carbon control.
Put it in a window.
It'll manage the playback
manipulation of your QuickTime movies.
It always creates a movie controller,
but of course that can be hidden.
So you don't even need to deal with the
movie controller if you don't want to.
Carbon movie control
will do that for you.
It handles all the events,
mouse and keyboard events.
It can participate in the
edit menu and in edit command
handling if you want it to.
And of course,
you can install event handlers as well
to customize the behavior of the control.
and Assuming you've created a window and
you've done a new movie from DataRef,
and you've
You say, create movie control.
Pass it the window you want to put it in,
you pass it the movie
you want it to control,
and it hands you back a Carbon control.
You run your application event loop,
and that's it.
Nothing further in your
app you need to do unless,
of course,
you want to customize the behavior.
We have working sample code.
Check this out.
Let's go to demo one.
This app is a very simple app.
It doesn't even have file open.
When it comes up,
it brings up Nav Services,
says what movie do you want to open.
and others.
We're going to stretch this window out.
Like I said, it's not a very smart app.
He just created a movie control,
a Carbon movie control,
and started his app event loop.
So you've got full-on playback.
Jump around.
to do.
It's all there.
Now that was fairly straightforward,
but let's see what happens.
If you pass in,
I don't know if you noticed in
the create movie controller call,
there was a flags where it
was being passed in zero.
Well,
if you pass in one flag that says "oh,
and I want to edit too," that's the
only difference between these two apps,
and you
Same thing, but I have full-on editing.
Hang on, let's just go here.
We'll select this.
[Transcript missing]
No code in the app doing this.
This is just a control in a window.
The control is handling
all of that for you.
Okay, back to slides.
Now we're going to bring up Ian again.
Sorry.
Thank you, Greg.
Greg wrote the tasking mechanism
we have in QuickTime 6,
and it saved a lot of CPU usage.
The QuickTime player uses it.
Also, he mentioned in Cocoa,
we are committed in QuickTime to
increasing the support in Cocoa.
I'm wondering how many
people out here use Cocoa?
Oh, very good.
How many people are
planning on using Cocoa?
Adrian Baerlocher, let's introduce him.
He's an engineer on our team,
started about a year ago.
He'll tell you about the
QuickTime Broadcaster
that he's been working on.
Good morning.
So QuickTime Broadcaster is a
new application we're working
on for broadcasting live events
using Mac OS X and a camera.
It's a Cocoa application that
uses many components of QuickTime.
And what we did is we wrote a
set of Objective-C classes that
wrap many of these components.
For example, the sequence grabbers,
standard compression,
and the broadcast APIs.
So let's get right into the demo.
Could I demo one on both screens, please?
Okay, so here we have the broadcaster
in its simplified view.
In this view,
we hide most of the settings,
and you just select
A set of presets,
and we're going to provide some
presets with this application,
settings that we think are really good.
Presets are just a subset
of all the settings.
So, for example, we have an audio, video,
and network presets.
For those of you that want to do your
own presets or just change the settings,
you can show details,
and then we have settings galore.
We have all the standard
compressors supported by QuickTime.
And same with the devices,
we're using the sequence grabbers,
so those IIDC cameras you
learned about this morning,
they'll work with this application.
So let's try a broadcast.
Could I have demo one on the
screen on my right and demo
two on the screen on my left,
please?
Okay, so let's start this one up.
We have some interesting content.
[Transcript missing]
And if you want to try
this application out,
it comes pre-installed
with Jaguar Server,
which is on two of the CDs you
received here this week.
Thanks.
Back to you.
Thank you, Adrian.
The two weeks are almost up.
My mind is uneasy.
I desire a refreshing warm beverage.
have brought you liquid
sustenance to quench your thirst.
Thank you.
Ah!
This beverage is
scalding and caffeinated.
I cannot drink it.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, don't leave yet.
There's still more to come.
Throughout the day,
we'll be doing QuickTime sessions
and also on Friday.
Those of you that want to develop
your own QuickTime components,
we talked about the extensibility,
you could write your own
media handlers or codex,
tons of codex.
Please go to the session
on Friday at 9:00 a.m.
Please stick around after lunch,
come back in this hall today.
We have a lot more and even
more interesting things
to show this afternoon.
On Friday, there will also be a session
on QuickTime for the web.
Let me point Thursday afternoon at
2:00 in the Civic Center for those of
you that are dealing with streaming
issues and want to learn more about
the new QuickTime streaming server,
please go there and of
course our feedback session.
And oh, Jeff Lowe,
you want to contact him with all your
developer tech support questions.
You'll see this slide often today.
For more information,
we have the sample code out there.
And please,
please take advantage of this.
We're bringing the engineers
on site here to work with you.
Come with your code, sit down with us,
have a chat,
and let us write the stuff for you to
get it working inside your application.
You won't get many
opportunities like this.
So please do this.
Oh.
Can I stop?
If you can take the babble from my hand,
it will be time for you to leave.
What an unfortunate lot is mine.
If only I had leveraged the power of
QuickTime's robust developer APIs,
I might have pleased my master
and earned the right to go home
and change out of this wretched,
smelly gee.
Grasshopper,
if you can take the pebble from my hand,
it will be time for you to leave.
It is time for you to leave.
Zang.